AN ESSAY ΟΝ WYCLIF’S PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEM. XIX

They are indeed, it we admit that T ruth is nothing but the fashion of
the hour - or the age3 if the thinker be of those who take their
thoughts ready-made from the hands of some great writer of their time,
and who, sublimely trustful, see no difference between what is now

acceptable to the many and what will averlastingly remain, —- between
Modernity aud Infallibility. Such a man may well laugh at Wyclif' s
thoughts and doctrines, link by link and systematically evolved-though
he is utterly unable to point out where the error lies, Yet even for him

this synopsis imperfect though it is, may have some sort of historical
interest. But, unwilling as 1 am to disturb such sels-complacency, lmust
enter a mild protest against the word Dream. If it means anything, it
means a series of confused imaginatious, incoherent one with the other,
and devoid of any basis in reason. Surely what has been written shows
that there is method in Wyclif's dreaming, that his strange theory of
the universe is the mere development of a fundamental theorem, which
itsell seems indubitably to result from his triumphant attack upon the
Nominalistic position. Where is the ssaw in Wyclif’s logie? You will
hardly find it in the secundary deductions‚ welded together with no less
strength than care. If it lies iu¹ the method by which he establishes
the existence of Universals, then point it out. lf you are unable to do
this, yet cannot admit that it is true, because its developments go
counter to ‘Modern Thought', - then talk no longer of dreamS, but
confess that the Englishman who five hundred years ago raised this
edifice was a mighty thinker; nay, perhaps — if Ι may say so without
giving oflence - even more intelligent thau yuurself, Ο man of the
Twentieth Century!

From the present view of Wyclif’s great system l have (to my
great regret) omitted many a side-issue full of profound truth and
quaint originality, many a loreshadowing of the most recent theories of
physical aud chemical seleuce, — Wyclif’s admission of atoms, for
instance — many a logical disquisition that would set him lar above
the best dialecticians of the present day. But 1 was cumpelled to consider
whether these would interest. Τ he subject-matter bristlcs with such
abstruse difficulties in most caseS, and our author’s language is so
crabbed and technical all through, that l could not expect even the most
indulgent readers to follow me. The connection, however, between

Wyclil's philosophical system and those theological doctrines lor which
ll ”

 

